                                                                                                                       Chapter 5

                                                                                                                    Nomenclature




Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.
Section 5.1
Naming Compounds

Binary Compounds
• Composed of two elements
• Divided into broad classes
   – Compounds that contain metal and a nonmetal
   – Compounds that contain two nonmetals




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   2
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


Binary Ionic Compounds

• Contain positive cations
  and negative anions
    – Type I compounds
          • Metal present forms only
            one cation
    – Type II compounds
          • Metal present can form
            two or more cations with
            different charges




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   3
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


Common Simple Cations and Anions




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   4
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


Rules for Naming Type I Ionic Compounds
• The cation is always named first and the anion
  second
• A simple cation takes its name from the name of
  the element
• A simple anion is named by taking the first part
  of the element name (the root) and adding –ide
     – Thus the Cl− ion is called chloride




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   5
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


Binary Ionic Compounds (Type I)
•    Examples:
            NaCl
            Kl
            CaS




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   6
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


              Exercise, 1

What is the name of the compound SrBr2?
  a) Strontium bromine
  b) Sulfur bromide
  c) Strontium dibromide
  d) Strontium bromide




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   7
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


Binary Ionic Compounds (Type II)
•    Metals in these
     compounds can form
     more than one type of
     cation
•    Charge on the metal ion
     must be specified
•    Roman numeral
     indicates the charge of
     the metal cation
•    Transition metal cations
     usually require a Roman
     numeral
       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   8
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


Common Type II Cations




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   9
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


Rules for Naming Type II Ionic Compounds
• The cation is always named first and the anion
  second
• Because the cation can assume more than one
  charge, the charge is specified by a Roman
  numeral in parentheses




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   10
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


Binary Ionic Compounds (Type II) (continued)
•    Examples:
            CuBr
            FeS
            PbO2




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   11
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


              Exercise, 2


   What is the name of the compound CrO2?
   a) Chromium oxide
   b) Chromium(ii) oxide
   c) Chromium(iv) oxide




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   12
Section 5.2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain a Metal and a Nonmetal (Types I and II)


              Exercise, 3


   What is the correct name of the compound that results
   from the most stable ion for sulfur and the metal ion that
   contains 24 electrons?

   a) Iron(iii) sulfide
   b) Chromium(ii) sulfide
   c) Nickel(III) sulfate
   d) Iron(II) sulfide



       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   13
Section 5.3
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain Only Nonmetals (Type III)

Rules for Naming Type III Binary Compounds
• Formed between two nonmetals
   – The first element in the formula is named first, and the full
     element name is used
   – The second element is named as though it were an anion
   – Prefixes are used to denote the numbers of atoms present
   – The prefix mono- is never used for naming the first
     element




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   14
Section 5.3
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain Only Nonmetals (Type III)


Table 5.3: Prefixes Used to Indicate Numbers in
Chemical Names




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   15
Section 5.3
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain Only Nonmetals (Type III)

Binary Covalent Compounds (Type III)
•   Examples
          CO2
          SF6
          N2O4




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   16
Section 5.3
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain Only Nonmetals (Type III)

            Exercise, 4


  What is the name of the compound SeO2?

  a) Selenium oxide
  b) Selenium dioxide
  c) Selenium(ii) oxide
  d) Selenium(iv) dioxide




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   17
Section 5.4
Naming Binary Compounds: A Review

Flow Chart for Naming Binary Compounds




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   18
Section 5.5
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions

Polyatomic Ions and Oxyanions
• Polyatomic ions
   – Charged entities composed of several atoms bound
     together
   – Have special names and must be memorized
• Oxyanions
   – Polyatomic anions exist that contain an atom of a given
     element and different numbers of oxygen atoms




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   19
Section 5.5
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions

Table 5.4: Names of Common Polyatomic Ions




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   20
Section 5.5
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions

Naming Convention
• Naming ionic compounds containing polyatomic ions
  follows rules similar to those for binary compounds.
   – Ammonium acetate




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   21
Section 5.5
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions

Polyatomic Ions
  Examples
         NaOH
         Mg(NO3)2
         (NH4)2SO4
         Fe3 ( PO4)2




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   22
Section 5.5
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions

Overall Strategy for Naming Chemical Compounds




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   23
Section 5.5
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions

           Exercise, 5

  What is the name of the compound KClO3?

  a) Potassium chlorite
  b) Potassium Chlorate
  c) Potassium Perchlorate
  d) Potassium Carbonate




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   24
Section 5.5
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions

          Exercise, 6


  Examine the following table of formulas and names.
  Which of the compounds are named correctly?


                                                                         Formula                                Name
  a)      I, II
  b)      I, III, IV                                I                    P2 O 5                                 Diphosphorus pentoxide
  c)      I, IV                                     II                   ClO2                                   Chlorine oxide
  d)      I only                                    III                  PbI4                                   Lead iodide
                                                    IV                   CuSO4                                  Copper(I) sulfate


       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   25
Section 5.6
Naming Acids

Acids
• Certain molecules produce H+ ions when dissolved in
  water
• Acids can be recognized by the hydrogen that appears
  first in the formula—HCl
• Molecule with one or more H+ ions attached to an anion




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   26
Section 5.6
Naming Acids

Rules for Naming Acids
• If the anion does not contain oxygen, the acid is named
  with the prefix hydro– and the suffix –ic attached to the
  root name for the element
• Examples
        HCl(aq)
        HCN(aq)
        H2S(aq)




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   27
Section 5.6
Naming Acids

Rules for Naming Acids (continued)
• When the anion contains oxygen, the acid name is
  formed from the root name of the central element of the
  anion or the anion name, with a suffix of -ic or –ous
• Examples
        H2SO4 (aq)
        H3PO3 (aq)
        HC2H3O2 (aq)




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   28
Section 5.6
Naming Acids
Table 5.5: Names of Acids That Do Not Contain
Oxygen




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   29
Section 5.6
Naming Acids
Table 5.6: Names of Some Oxygen-Containing
Acids




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   30
Section 5.6
Naming Acids

Figure 5.3: Flowchart for Naming Acids




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   31
Section 5.6
Naming Acids

           Exercise, 7


  Which of the following compounds is named
  incorrectly?

 a) KNO3                                         Potassium nitrate
 b) TiO2                                         Titanium(II) oxide
 c) Sn(OH)4                                      Tin(IV) hydroxide
 d) PBr5                                         Phosphorus pentabromide
 e) H2SO3                                        Sulfurous acid



    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   32
Section 5.6
Naming Acids

Examples, 2
• Sodium hydroxide
   – NaOH
• Potassium carbonate
   – K2CO3
• Sulfuric acid
   – H2SO4 (aq)
• Dinitrogen pentoxide
   – N2O5
• Cobalt(III) nitrate
   – Co(NO3)3


      Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   33
Section 5.6
Naming Acids

           Exercise, 8

  A compound has the formula XCl3 where X could
  represent a metal or nonmetal. What could the name of
  this compound be?

  a) Phosphorus trichloride
  b) Carbon monochloride
  c) Tin(iv) chloride
  d) Magnesium chloride



    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   34
Section 5.7
Writing Formulas from Names

Learning to Write the Formula of a Compound
• Essential to know the formula of a compound from its
  name
• Important to learn the name, composition, and charge of
  each of the common polyatomic anions (and the NH4+
  cation)
• Must learn the names of common acids




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   35
