                                                                                                                 Chapter 4


                                                                                          Chemical Foundations:
                                                                                        Elements, Atoms, and Ions




Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.
Section 4.1
The Elements

Elements
• 118 known
   – 88 occur naturally
   – Rest have been made in laboratories
• Vary in abundance
   – Only 9 elements account for most of the compounds found
     in the Earth’s crust
   – These 9 elements account for over 98% of the total mass
     of the Earth’s crust, Oceans and Atmosphere
• List of elements found in living matter is very different
  from those found in the Earth’s crust
   – Oxygen, carbon and nitrogen forms the basis for all
     biologically important molecules
   – Trace elements present in the body are very crucial
     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   2
Section 4.1
The Elements
Distribution of 18 Most Abundant Elements in the
Earth’s Crust, Oceans, and Atmosphere




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   3
Section 4.1
The Elements

How the Term Element is Used
• Could mean a single atom of an element (Ar or H)
• Could mean molecules of an element (H2), which is
  hydrogen found in its natural state
• Could mean atoms of an element are present in some
  form (sodium found in the human body)
• Look at each particular case to determine its proper use




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   4
Section 4.2
Symbols for the Elements

Element Names and Symbols
• Each element has a unique one- or two-letter symbol
• First letter is always capitalized and the second is not
• The symbol usually consists of the first or first two letters
  of the element’s name
   – Oxygen: O
   – Krypton: Kr
• Sometimes the symbol is taken from the element’s
  original Latin or Greek name
   – Gold: Au from aurum
   – Lead: Pb from plumbum


      Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   5
Section 4.2
Symbols for the Elements
Names and Symbols of the Most Common
Elements




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   6
Section 4.3
Dalton’s Atomic Theory

Atomic composition of Elements and Compounds
• Most natural materials are mixtures of pure substances
• Pure substances are either elements or combinations of
  elements called compounds
• A given compound always contains the same
  proportions, by mass, of the elements




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   7
Section 4.3
Dalton’s Atomic Theory

Law of Constant Composition
• A given compound always has the same composition,
  regardless of where it comes from
   – Water always contains 8 g of oxygen for every 1 g of
     hydrogen
   – Carbon dioxide always contains 2.7 g of oxygen for every
     1 g of carbon




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   8
Section 4.3
Dalton’s Atomic Theory

Dalton’s Atomic Theory
• Elements are made of tiny particles called atoms
• All atoms of a given element are identical
• The atoms of a given element are different from those of
  any other element
• Atoms of one element can combine with atoms of other
  elements to form compounds
   – A given compound always has the same relative numbers
     and types of atoms




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   9
Section 4.3
Dalton’s Atomic Theory

Dalton’s Atomic Theory (continued)
• Atoms are indivisible in chemical processes
   – Atoms are not created or destroyed in chemical
     reactions
   – A chemical reaction simply changes the way the
     atoms are grouped together




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   10
Section 4.3
Dalton’s Atomic Theory

     Concept Check


Which of the following statements regarding Dalton’s
atomic theory are still believed to be true?

• Elements are made of tiny particles called atoms
• All atoms of a given element are identical
• A given compound always has the same relative
  numbers and types of atoms
• Atoms are indestructible



     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   11
Section 4.4
Formulas of Compounds

Chemical Formulas Describe Compounds
• Compound: Distinct substance that is composed of
  atoms of two or more elements and always contains
  exactly the same relative masses of those elements
• Chemical Formulas: Express the types of atoms and the
  number of each type in each unit, or molecule, of a given
  compound




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   12
Section 4.4
Formulas of Compounds

Rules for Writing Formulas
• Each atom present is represented by its element symbol
• The number of each type of atom is indicated by a
  subscript written to the right of the element symbol
• When only one atom of a given type is present, the
  subscript 1 is not written




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   13
Section 4.4
Formulas of Compounds

     Formulas of Compounds: Exercise

The pesticide known as DDT paralyzes insects by binding
to their nerve cells, leading to uncontrolled firing of the
nerves. Before most of the uses of DDT were banned in the
U.S., many insects had developed a resistance to it. Write
out the formula for DDT. It contains 14 carbon atoms, 9
hydrogen atoms, and 5 atoms of chlorine
C14H9Cl5




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   14
Section 4.5
The Structure of the Atom

William Thomson (Plum Pudding Model)
• Reasoned that the atom
  might be thought of as a
  uniform “pudding” of
  positive charge with
  enough negative
  electrons scattered within
  to counterbalance that
  positive charge




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   16
Section 4.5
The Structure of the Atom

Ernest Rutherford (1911)
• Conducted experiment on alpha particle bombardment of
  metal foil
   – Concluded from the results that the plum pudding model is
     wrong
   – Atom has a dense center of positive charge called the
     nucleus
   – Electrons travel around the nucleus at a relatively large
     distance
   – A proton has the same magnitude of charge as the
     electron, but its charge is positive



     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   17
Section 4.5
The Structure of the Atom

Rutherford and Chadwick (1932)
• Most nuclei also contain a neutral particle called the
  neutron
• A neutron is slightly more massive than a proton but has
  no charge




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   18
Section 4.6
Introduction to the Modern Concept of Atomic Structure

The atom contains
•   Electrons: Negatively charged and found outside the
    nucleus
•   Protons: Found in the nucleus with positive charge,
    equal in magnitude to the electron’s negative charge
•   Neutrons: Found in the nucleus with no charge and
    virtually same mass as a proton




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   19
Section 4.6
Introduction to the Modern Concept of Atomic Structure
Mass and Charge of the Electron, Proton, and
Neutron




    Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   20
Section 4.6
Introduction to the Modern Concept of Atomic Structure
Why do different atoms have different chemical
properties?
• The chemistry of an atom arises from its electrons
• Electrons are the parts of atoms that “intermingle” when
  atoms combine to form molecules
• It is the number of electrons that really determines
  chemical behavior




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   21
Section 4.7
Isotopes

Isotopes
• Atoms with the same number of protons but different
  numbers of neutrons
• Show almost identical chemical properties
   – Chemistry of an atom is due to its electrons
• In nature, elements are usually found as a mixture of
  isotopes




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   22
Section 4.7
Isotopes

Two Isotopes of Sodium




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   23
Section 4.7
Isotopes

Isotopes (continued)

                                                         A
                                                         Z     X

•   X = the symbol of the element
•   A = the mass number
       – Number of protons and neutrons
•   Z = the atomic number
       – Number of protons




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   24
Section 4.7
Isotopes

Isotopes: An Example
                    14                                                                                             12
                     6      C                                                                                       6     C
• C = the symbol for carbon                                                           • C = the symbol for carbon
• 6 = the atomic number                                                               • 6 = the atomic number
        – 6 protons                                                                                         – 6 protons
• 14 = the mass number                                                                • 12 = the mass number
        – 6 protons and 8                                                                                   – 6 protons and 6
        neutrons                                                                                            neutrons




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   25
Section 4.7
Isotopes

     Isotopes: Exercise

A certain isotope X contains 23 protons and 28 neutrons
• What is the mass number of this isotope?
• Identify the element

Mass Number = 51

Vanadium




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   26
Section 4.8
Introduction to the Periodic Table

The Periodic Table
• The periodic table shows all of the known elements in
  the order of increasing atomic number




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   27
Section 4.8
Introduction to the Periodic Table

The Periodic Table (continued 1)
• Metals vs. Nonmetals
• Groups or Families: Elements in the same vertical
  columns and have similar chemical properties
• Periods: Horizontal rows of elements




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   28
Section 4.8
Introduction to the Periodic Table

The Periodic Table (continued 2)




• Most elements are metals and occur on the left side
• The nonmetals appear on the right side
• Metalloids are elements that have some metallic and
  some nonmetallic properties
     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   29
Section 4.8
Introduction to the Periodic Table

Physical Properties of Metals
• Efficient conduction of heat and electricity
• Malleability
   – They can be hammered into thin sheets
• Ductility
   – They can be pulled into wires
• Lustrous appearance




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   30
Section 4.8
Introduction to the Periodic Table

Physical Properties of Nonmetals
• Lack properties of metals
• Exhibit more variation in properties
• Can be gases, liquids, or solids at room temperature




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   31
Section 4.8
Introduction to the Periodic Table

Physical Properties of Metalloids
• Exhibit a mixture of metallic and non-metallic properties




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   32
Section 4.9
Natural States of the Elements

Natural States of the Elements
• Most elements are quite reactive
• Elements are not generally found in pure form
   – Exceptions
         • Noble metals: Gold, platinum and silver
         • Noble gases: Group 8




      Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   33
Section 4.9
Natural States of the Elements

Diatomic Molecules




•   Nitrogen gas contains N2                                                                  • Oxygen gas contains O2
    molecules                                                                                   molecules


      Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   34
Section 4.9
Natural States of the Elements
Elements That Exist as Diatomic Molecules
in Their Elemental Forms




      Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   35
Section 4.9
Natural States of the Elements

Allotropes
• Different forms of a given element
• Example
   – Solid carbon occurs in three forms
         • Diamond
         • Graphite
         • Buckminsterfullerene




      Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   36
Section 4.9
Natural States of the Elements

Allotropes of Carbon




      Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   37
Section 4.10
Ions

Formation of Ions
• Atoms can form ions by gaining or losing electrons
   – Metals tend to lose one or more electrons to form positive
     ions called cations




  – Cations are generally named by using the name of the
    parent atom
       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   38
Section 4.10
Ions

Anions
• Nonmetals tend to gain one or more electrons to form
  negative ions called anions




• Anions are named by using the root of the atom name
  followed by the suffix –ide
       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   39
Section 4.10
Ions

Ion Charges and the Periodic Table
• The ion that a particular atom will form can be
  predicted from the atom’s position on the periodic
  table

                                   Group or Family                                                      Charge
                                  Alkali Metals (1A)                                                     1+
                                Alkaline Earth Metals (2A)                                               2+
                                        Halogens (7A)                                                     1–
                                    Noble Gases (8A)                                                       0



       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   40
Section 4.10
Ions

Ion Charges and the Periodic Table (continued)




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   41
Section 4.10
Ions

              Exercise 1

  An ion with a 3+ charge contains 23 electrons. Which
  ion is it?

  a) Fe3+
  b) V3+
  c) Ca3+
  d) Sc3+




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   42
Section 4.10
Ions

              Exercise 2

   A certain ion X+ contains 54 electrons and 78 neutrons
   • What is the mass number of this ion?


    133




       Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   43
Section 4.11
Compounds That Contain Ions

Ionic Compounds
• Ions combine to form ionic compounds
• Properties of ionic compounds
   – High melting points
   – Conduct electricity
        • If melted
        • If dissolved in water




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   44
Section 4.11
Compounds That Contain Ions

Ionic Compounds (continued)
• Ionic compounds are electrically neutral
• The charges on the anions and cations in the compound
  must sum to zero




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   45
Section 4.11
Compounds That Contain Ions

Formulas for Ionic Compounds
•   Write the cation element symbol followed by the anion
    element symbol
•   The number of cations and anions must be correct for
    their charges to sum to zero




     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   46
Section 4.11
Compounds That Contain Ions

            Concept Check 1

 A compound contains an unknown ion X and has the
 formula XCl2. Ion X contains 20 electrons. What is the
 identity of X?

 a) Ti2+
 b) Sc+
 c) Ca2+
 d) Cr2+



     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   47
Section 4.11
Compounds That Contain Ions

            Concept Check 2

 A member of the alkaline earth metal family whose
 most stable ion contains 36 electrons forms a
 compound with bromine. What is the correct formula
 for this compound?

 a) CaBr2
 b) KrBr
 c) RbBr
 d) SrBr2


     Copyright ©2019 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be scanned, copied or duplicated, or posted to a publicly accessible website, in whole or in part.   48
